content/_index.md, before:

---
name: "CPunch"
pfp: "pfp.png"
socialList:
  - name: twitter
    url: "https://twitter.com/CPunch71"
  - name: github
    url: "https://github.com/CPunch"
  - name: rss
    url: "https://openpunk.com/index.xml"
---

## Welcome!

Welcome to my tomb of software! I'm CPunch, I [write software](/critiques) (for you!) and [reverse engineer](/tags/reverse-engineering) things. I enjoy being curious, playing the piano and [exploring](/places).

Some all-encompassing highlights:
- [git.openpunk.com](https://git.openpunk.com) - my self-hosted Gitea instance, most of my projects are mirrored here.
- [OpenFusion](https://github.com/OpenFusionProject/OpenFusion) - FusionFall server emulator, relevant [post](/pages/fusionfall-openfusion/)
- [Laika](https://github.com/CPunch/Laika) - Tiny malware written in modern C to help you grow as a reverse engineer, relevant [post](/pages/obfuscation-in-c/)
- [Cosmo](https://github.com/CPunch/Cosmo) - Tiny scripting language, relevant [post](/pages/cosmo-workflow/)
- [Lua VM Manipulation](https://github.com/CPunch/LUA_VM_EXAMPLE) - Manipulating embedded Lua VMs, relevant [post](/pages/manipulating-lua-vms-1/)

Checkout my [blog](/pages) where I write about my projects mostly, also checkout my [journal](/journal) where I write about things not necessarily software related :D

## Contact

Any questions or concerns can be emailed to me at [openpunk@protonmail.com](mailto:openpunk@protonmail.com). I also have an [RSS feed](https://openpunk.com/index.xml) if you'd like to keep tabs on me :)

Commit message:

Home: added commission by hsgrace!
commissions her by reaching her at https://hsgrace.tumblr.com

content/_index.md, after:

---
name: "CPunch"
pfp: "cpunch.png"
socialList:
  - name: twitter
    url: "https://twitter.com/CPunch71"
  - name: github
    url: "https://github.com/CPunch"
  - name: rss
    url: "https://openpunk.com/index.xml"
---

## Welcome!

Welcome to my tomb of software! I'm CPunch, I [write software](/critiques) (for you!) and [reverse engineer](/tags/reverse-engineering) things. I enjoy being curious, playing the piano and [exploring](/places). Wonderful artwork above was made by [**@hsgrace**](https://hsgrace.tumblr.com)!

Some all-encompassing highlights:
- [git.openpunk.com](https://git.openpunk.com) - my self-hosted Gitea instance, most of my projects are mirrored here.
- [OpenFusion](https://github.com/OpenFusionProject/OpenFusion) - FusionFall server emulator, relevant [post](/pages/fusionfall-openfusion/)
- [Laika](https://github.com/CPunch/Laika) - Tiny malware written in modern C to help you grow as a reverse engineer, relevant [post](/pages/obfuscation-in-c/)
- [Cosmo](https://github.com/CPunch/Cosmo) - Tiny scripting language, relevant [post](/pages/cosmo-workflow/)
- [Lua VM Manipulation](https://github.com/CPunch/LUA_VM_EXAMPLE) - Manipulating embedded Lua VMs, relevant [post](/pages/manipulating-lua-vms-1/)

Checkout my [blog](/pages) where I write about my projects mostly, also checkout my [journal](/journal) where I write about things not necessarily software related :D

## Contact

Any questions or concerns can be emailed to me at [openpunk@protonmail.com](mailto:openpunk@protonmail.com). I also have an [RSS feed](https://openpunk.com/index.xml) if you'd like to keep tabs on me :)
